Title: Developer PSA: Learn to type!
Date: 2024-10-19
Author: Simon Larsén
Tags: software engineering
Category: Programming
Slug: learn-to-type

Humans aren't great at multitasking. You can focus on just about one thing at a
time. This doesn't mean that you can only _do_ one thing at a time, because not
all things you do require your full attention. For example, try walking around,
but before taking each step, really focus on moving that foot forward. Think
each step out loud like you haven't walked before. It will probably work out
fine: the movement is itself the end goal and holds all of your attention.
However, what if you turn that movement into a means to an end, where that end
is to do something far more complex, such as playing soccer? You will find that
it is near impossible to focus on the individual steps while at the same time
achieving that higher goal. But, clearly, people play soccer just fine, because
they aren't actually _focusing_ on moving their body. It's so engrained in their
muscle memory that it just kind of happens. Like an auto pilot.

Programming is similar. The higher goal is to build a program, while the means
to an end is typing on a keyboard. To be able to fully focus on the former, the
latter needs to be on auto pilot. Many programmers that I've worked with or
trained have not had typing on auto pilot. They frequently need to pause what
they're doing to search for the `$` symbol for the umpteenth time, or struggle
to get a pair of brackets in place. The typing requires some amount of focus,
which detracts focus from actually building the program. They are effectively
multitasking on something that should be a single activity. This is further
exasperated by pair-programming situations, where there's also a level of
communication involved.

You need to get the typing on auto pilot. It should just happen. Some will make
a counterpoint in saying that the vast majority of time in programming is spent
reading code rather than writing code, and so becoming faster at typing
doesn't really gain you that many benefits. Except it's not about becoming
faster, it's about reducing mental strain while programming, so that
counterpoint completely misses the mark. The fact that becoming a more
proficient typist also makes you faster is simply a neat side effect. And
becoming proficient really isn't very difficult. Let me tell you how I did it.

# Learning finger placement
The first thing to learn about typing is the very basics: finger placement. You
shouldn't be using your right index finger to do 90% of the typing, and your
left pinky shouldn't be completely unutilized. They all need to contribute.

A good place to start is [TypingCat](https://thetypingcat.com/typing-speed-test).
It shows you where to position your fingers while typing each character. I used
it frequently when learning the Colemak layout and it worked great for
me[ref]You do not need to switch to another keyboard layout. The scientific
evidence for the superiority of alternate layouts is dubious at best. I did it
only because I like to try new things.[/ref]. You very likely have some nasty
habits to unlearn when it comes to finger placement, so be judicious about
using the fingers indicated. Go very slow until you feel like you're starting to
utilize all fingers at your disposal.

![The TypingCat online typing tutor]({photo}learn_to_type/typingcat.png)

Practice this 10-15 minutes every day before you start work, and you should see
improvements to your typing fairly quickly. Keep in mind that accuracy and
comfort are more important than speed. The end goal is not to become blazingly
fast, but to reduce the amount of focus you need to put into the typing.

Speed will however come with time, and combined with accuracy, you have two easy
to measure metrics to gauge your improvements. Seeing such concrete improvements
can be a fun motivator to keep you practicing. I will however refrain from
providing any hard numbers about what speeds you should reach as it's fairly
arbitrary. But in terms of accuracy, you should aim for near perfect scores at
all times. If you are inaccurate, you are typing too fast and need to slow down.

At this stage, you will also likely be looking at your keyboard quite
frequently. However, you should be [touch
typing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Touch_typing) comfortably and accurately
before you graduate to the next level of practice.

# Leveling up
Once you've gotten the basics down and can touch type comfortably, I would
suggest proceeding to [monkeytype](https://monkeytype.com/) as it's a lot more
customizable. Use the basic configuration in the beginning, and practice 10-15
minutes a day until you start to feel comfortable and get near perfect accuracy.

Then start adding in punctuation and numbers[ref]There is a toolbar above the
typing area where you can adjust such things[/ref]. Finally, you can change the
"language" to whatever programming language you're currently using and you'll
get words and symbols drafted from it[ref]The language can be selected just
above the typing area. All programming languages are called `code <language>`,
e.g. `code javascript`.[/ref]. This will allow you to practice the special
characters that are relevant to your programming language of choice.

You can even go so far as to upload your own custom text (perhaps some code) by
clicking `custom` and then `change` to the very far right of the toolbar! It's
not something I ever did as, at that point, I think it's better to practice
typing in your editor instead, but it's an option if you really like monkeytype.

> Even though I consider myself a highly proficient typist, I still practice on
> monkeytype every now and then.

# Some words about keyboard layout
While I don't think there's good reason for most people to switch from the
standard QWERTY keyboard layout, there _is_ good reason to choose a variant of
that layout that's well suited for programming. A layout that I find absolutely
atrocious for programming is the Swedish and Finnish multilingual layout (both
very similar).

<img alt="The Finnish multilingual keyboard layout" src="/images/learn_to_type/KB_Finnish_Multilingual.svg" style="max-width: 95%;">

> The Finnish multilingual keyboard layout, sourced from Wikipedia[ref]By KB_Sweden.svg: adapted by StuartBrady from File:KB United Kingdom.svgderivative work: Simo Kaupinmäki (talk) (created in Inkscape; text converted to paths due to use of the uncommon FreeSans font) - KB_Sweden.svg, CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=10276924[/ref]

The big problem with this layout is that the hard brackets (`[]`) and curly
braces (`{}`) require some real hand acrobatics, where you hold down `alt gr`
and press one of 7, 8, 9 or 0. I personally started getting some wrist pain from
doing that very awkward movement over and over again. I found relief in the US
ANSI QWERTY layout, where the same characters are conveniently located just
above the home row, and hard brackets don't even require pressing a modifier
key.

<img alt="The US ANSI QWERTY layout" src="/images/learn_to_type/KB_United_States.svg" style="max-width: 95%;">

> The US ANSI QWERTY layout, sourced from Wikipedia[ref]By No machine-readable author provided. Denelson83 assumed (based on copyright claims). - No machine-readable source provided. Own work assumed (based on copyright claims)., CC BY-SA 3.0, https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=508928[/ref]

It made quite the difference for me. So if you live in a country with a quirky
layout, where some frequently used programming characters are in awkward
positions, consider adopting a layout that is more appropriate for programming.

# Closing words
Trust me when I say that learning to type properly will really benefit you in
the long run. I'm not advocating that you practice for hours a day and become
the fastest typist in town, but that you become proficient enough with typing
that it's not something you have to think about when you're working on complex
problems. All your focus should be toward solving the problem at hand, and
having to divert attention to the typing is such an unnecessary distraction to
have. If I could switch keyboard layout from QWERTY to Colemak within a couple
of months and without too much effort spent, you can become proficient with the
layout you're already using without too much effort as well.
