Title: Creating a standalone (runnable) Kotlin .jar file with IntelliJ and Gradle
Date: 2018-10-17T20:15:46Z
Modified: 2018-10-29T21:02:18Z
Author: Simon Larsén
Tags: kotlin,gradle,intellij

I've recently started dabbling in some Kotlin, and have found it a very pleasant
experience. One of the first things I wanted to do was to create a standalone
`.jar` file, including the Kotlin runtime and any other dependencies. This,
as it turns out, was a bit tricky. In this short article, I will walk you
through creating a small command line application using the
awesome [`clikt` library](https://ajalt.github.io/clikt/), and then packaging
it into a standalone `.jar`.

## Setting up
Start out with creating a new project by going to `File -> New -> Project`, select
Gradle in the leftmost menu bar (i.e. _not_ Kotlin), and then tick the Kotlin
box in the `Additional Libraries and Frameworks` menu. Then just fill in any
GroupId, ArtifactId and Version (I will use `slarse`, `app` and `0.1` for these
fields, respectively). Then just click `Next` with the defaults until the
project is created.

### Initial Gradle configuration
In the project root, you should now have a file called `build.gradle`, which
looks something like this:

```json
plugins {
    id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm' version '1.2.51'
}

group 'slarse'
version '0.1'

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    compile "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib-jdk8"
}

compileKotlin {
    kotlinOptions.jvmTarget = "1.8"
}
compileTestKotlin {
    kotlinOptions.jvmTarget = "1.8"
}
```

Before we can compile a project with `clikt`, we need to add it as a dependency.
We can do that by adding `compile "com.github.ajalt:clikt:1.5.0"` in the
dependencies section. It should now look like this:

```json
dependencies {
    compile "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib-jdk8"
    compile "com.github.ajalt:clikt:1.5.0"
}
```
    
Then hit the little refresh symbol in the bottom left corner
(should say `Refresh Gradle Project` when you hover your mouse over it) to
download the new dependency. And that's it for now!
We'll get back to the `gradle.build` file once we
want to configure our `jar` task, but let's create the app first!

## Creating the application
Let's make this easy: we'll just use the sample application available from the
[`clikt` documentation](https://ajalt.github.io/clikt/). It looks like this:


```kotlin
class Hello : CliktCommand() {
    val count: Int by option(help="Number of greetings").int().default(1)
    val name: String by option(help="The person to greet").prompt("Your name")

    override fun run() {
        for (i in 1..count) {
            echo("Hello $name!")
        }
    }
}

fun main(args: Array<String>) = Hello().main(args)
```

Create a Kotlin file called `main.kt` at `src/main/kotlin/main.kt` and paste
the above code into it. Note that we are using the default package here
(i.e. not defining a package) for the sake of simplicity.

For this to compile, we will need to add the following imports at the top:

```kotlin
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.core.CliktCommand
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.options.default
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.options.option
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.options.prompt
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.types.int
```

And that's it for the application, you should now be able to run it as usual.
When running it, there should appear a prompt in the terminal saying `Your name:`.
With that out of the way, the only thing left to do is to package our
fantastic application into a standalone `.jar` file.

## Packaging the application into a standalone `.jar` file
This is actually not very difficult, but you need to know what to do. We need
to create a so-called "fat" jar, which includes both the Kotlin runtime and the
`clikt` library. We also need to specify the name of our main class.

```json
jar {
    manifest {
        attributes 'Main-Class': 'MainKt'
    }
    from {
        configurations.compile.collect { it.isDirectory() ? it : zipTree(it) }
    }
}
```

Note that the class file generated by Kotlin for a file called `something.kt`
will be `SomethingKt.class`, which is why our main class is called `MainKt`.
With that in mind, the `manifest` section is self-explanatory: we specify
the main class. The `from` section collects all compile dependencies
(that we specified in the `dependencies` section) and package them with the
`.jar` file. The little piece of logic in the lambda is to properly add
directories and `.jar` files, respectively (directories are just added,
`.jar` files are unzipped and added).

> **Important:** The main class file must be specified with its fully qualified
> name. For example, if I were to define `main.kt` in the package `se.slarse`,
> then I would need to put `se.slarse.MainKt` instead of just `MainKt` in the
> manifest.
    
Anyway, that's really all we need to do.
It should now be possible to run the `jar` Gradle task to produce a `.jar` file
in `build/libs/<ArtifactId>-<Version>` (so in my case it is at
`build/libs/app-0.1.jar`). And that's it, hope it helped someone!

# Full source code and `build.gradle`
Here are both of the files we wrote in this tutorial, in their entirety.

```kotlin
// main.kt
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.core.CliktCommand
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.options.default
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.options.option
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.options.prompt
import com.github.ajalt.clikt.parameters.types.int

class Hello : CliktCommand() {
    val count: Int by option(help="Number of greetings").int().default(1)
    val name: String by option(help="The person to greet").prompt("Your name")

    override fun run() {
        for (i in 1..count) {
            echo("Hello $name!")
        }
    }
}

fun main(args: Array<String>) = Hello().main(args)
```

---

```json
// build.gradle
plugins {
    id 'org.jetbrains.kotlin.jvm' version '1.2.51'
}

group 'se.slarse'
version '0.1'

repositories {
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    compile "org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-stdlib-jdk8"
    compile "com.github.ajalt:clikt:1.5.0"
}

compileKotlin {
    kotlinOptions.jvmTarget = "1.8"
}
compileTestKotlin {
    kotlinOptions.jvmTarget = "1.8"
}

jar {
    manifest {
        attributes 'Main-Class': 'MainKt'
    }
    from {
        configurations.compile.collect { it.isDirectory() ? it : zipTree(it) }
    }
}
```
